I always thought it would be Raven. 
The one who finally decided it was time to teach me. Raven seemed like the 
right fit. In all the big stories, he's the leading man. A beautiful bird with glossy 
black feathers. He's strong and graceful. Got a sharp wit and clever tongue. I heard 
that he found the First People on the beaches of the West Coast. That he stole the 
sun one day just for the fun of it. Tough, self-assured, a good sense of humour. All 
the things a real Spirit Guide should be. 
As I drive, I press the lever down to wash the windshield and watch as the pale 
blue liquid shoots onto the glass. I hold it down longer than I should, watching as 
the wipers move back and forth. Most of the bugs come off in the first pass, but a 
particularly juicy one stays put. No matter. I know this road well. The early-August 
corn is high in the fields on either side of me. I roll the windows down to let the 
fresh country air into the car. A flurry of birds rushes into the sky from one of the 
fields as I pass. I track their silhouettes for as long as I can, then return to scanning 
the highway stretched out in front of me. 
Raven was always the one the elders and other storytellers told us about. Tales 
of how he stole Crow's potlatch. How he made that proud bird sing and sing and 
sing until his voice was nothing but a croak, all while Raven gorged himself on 
food. How he'd created the world and then messed it up. A trickster and a trans- 
former. A herald of change, sometimes by accident and sometimes on purpose. A 
writer who only ever uses ink, who thinks that using pencil means admitting to 
mistakes. 
And yet I know why it couldn't ever have been Raven. He doesn't belong to us.
The Indians of Spirit Bear Point don't tell stories about Kakagi. Sure, I can smirk 
knowingly when I hear people talk about him here and there, but he's not mine. Me 
and Raven—we're different beasts. Hell, me and Raven aren't even the same kind 
of Indian. We aren't even neighbours. Something like three thousand kilometres 
separates us. No, it could never have been Raven. 
Then Wisakedjak maybe? "Whisky jack,” as my pale-skin brothers and sisters 
call him. Funny how saying it like that makes people understand. As if it's unheard 
of that the White Man might know a few words of a Native language, leastways 
enough to understand what we're saying. But no. Easier to throw in alcohol. An- 
other Indian always hounded by booze. 
He's a trickster too. One of many in a long line. A brother or cousin to Raven 
and Coyote. Wisakedjak is closer to home, a neighbour who lives in the next town 
over. He's a nice guy, a friend to the People. But he's not a friend of mine. He lives 
farther south and farther west. So, it wasn't Wisakedjak either. That's his Cree 
name, and I am not Cree. 
Anishnaabeg call him something else. 
Nanabush. 
Yes. Now that I've said it, thought it, felt it, I know that it's right. It's a name 
that has a certain weight on the tongue. A taste. Like lit sage in a windowless room. 
Or aluminum foil on an old filling. 
All the stories about Nanabush read like the memoirs of an ancient trouble- 
maker. Someone with the power to do great things but who doesn't want to put in 
the work. The old, good tales they tell around a fire say he was here when the world 
was young. That he was a child of the People and of the gods—if you can call them 
gods. Not our word, but I don't know what else to think. He had power, but so did 
everyone. Power that is unnoticed becomes stale. So Nanabush did what he want- 
ed. Served himself and his interests. I think of him as a creature of endless sum- 
mer. Someone who says, "I have time, so I'll do it later.” Later, later, later, until it's 
too late. 
Then again, I remember hearing how G'tchi Manitou sent him here to teach the 
People. His first task: naming all of the plants and animals. That must have been 
difficult. I have a hard enough time choosing a name for pets. I can't imagine hav- 
ing to figure out that a silverfish should be called a silverfish. But he did it. That 
Nanabush. He named everything from the eagle in the sky to the fish in the sea. 
I never understood how he could be a brilliant shapeshifter one moment and 
then the next he's tumbling naked down a hillside. Makes me wonder how he 
stacks up against all the stories about him. Smart guy, dumb choices? 
Is that why he came to me? So I could piece his story back together? He's look- 
ing for a chance to rewrite his history. 
I'm getting ahead of myself. After all, that crow only shows up when I'm sleep- 
ing. Could be a dream. Or a hallucination. Thinking about it only raises more ques- 
tions. Who is Nanabush and why would I pick that figment of my imagination to 
fixate on? 
Honestly, we're strangers. I'm making all of this up to try to reconcile the mess 
that is my life. No job. Dead dad. Why not enlist some made-up shapeshifter to try 
to teach me a few lessons in the old ways?
Could that be it? Nanabush, the Spirit Guide. 
Well, if that's the case, then I should introduce myself. 
Hello, Nanabush. My name is Hazel Ellis. Can't wait to get to know you. 
That's a lie, but I think it anyway. 
I keep driving, across the bridge that hangs above a river of clear, fresh water, 
through the Québécois town of Ste-Marie des Oblats, until I cross into Rez coun- 
try. The houses get smaller and the lawns are less tidy, filled with toys, bicycles 
abandoned haphazardly as the kids raced in for dinner. Some of the yards are even 
littered with garbage. That's what happens when you miss pickup day. One good 
breeze and the lawn doubles as a trash pile. A pack of Rez dogs crosses in front of 
my car and I have to slow down. They're led by a boxer-mix with one white ear who 
pauses to look at me while his packmates hurry to the other side of the road. 
As I drive past the motley pack, a weathered wooden sign in the shape of a 
medicine wheel comes into view, telling me: "Minwa pijawok! Welcome to Spirit 
Bear Point First Nation.”
The sky is always clearer here. Rows of birch, aspen, and pine stretch until their
limbs touch the clouds. When the wind weaves through the trees, it's as if waves 
are crashing onto the shore of a sea. People here take it for granted because they 
haven't left this place. But I know what I'm talking about. I've been there. These 
leaves sound like the ocean. 
The Trans-Canada cuts right through the reserve, which means there's always 
traffic. The only gas station runs out of gas so often that it's more of a corner store. 
Sometimes we have to boil our water before we drink it, but that's only if pipes 
burst. Spirit Bear Point is far from perfect. But I don't care. It's home. 
A line of cars and two transports hauling logs pass too quickly along the high- 
way that's a stone's throw from my front door. The speed limit here is fifty kilo- 
metres per hour. Which feels like a crawl from the ninety kilometres per hour of the 
Trans-Canada. But seriously? It's always made me crazy how fast people speed 
through the Rez. Just because you don't have to make any real turns to get back on 
the open road doesn't mean you can speed through and hit whatever stray dog or 
kid is running around. 
The first transport's horn bellows like a steam engine as two little kids with 
scraped knees walking by jump up and down excitedly on the roadside. They pump 
their arms repeatedly to sign to the second trucker to pull his horn, but they're left 
disappointed. I watch as they throw obscene gestures at the back end of the trans- 
port before picking up their bikes and pushing them across the road toward the 
trailer park. 
"Any more boxes left in that old Toyota?” 
Mom is standing in the entryway. She's leaning against the door frame with her 
arms crossed, watching me. Her face creases into a small smile. My mother, Nora 
Ellis, is who people envision when they think of Native women. Perfect brown skin, 
white even teeth; fine lines at the edges of her eyes that are the only sign of her age. 
Her jaw is angled, and she has cheekbones that most people get by using makeup 
and a paint-by-numbers guide. Her dark hair pulled half back from her face means 
she's been in the kitchen baking beans or bannock or maybe even both. 
I shake my head. "Nah, this is the last one.” 
"Bring it inside. You've got a lot of unpacking to do. I don't want these boxes 
and bags in the front room forever, you know.” 
I readjust the box in my arms, nudge the back door of my navy blue Toyota 
shut, and start for the front steps. The gravel crunches under my feet, distracting 
me. A crow croaks loudly on the power line above my head, startling me so much 
that I nearly drop the box. I turn to look and that black bird, with its shiny feathers 
and dark eyes, is staring right back at me. A flicker of recognition brushes my skin 
with goosebumps. 
"Nanabush.” 
And just like that, my mother has my attention. I look at her incredulously. 
"What?” 
She nods to the bird on the wire. "He used to change into a crow. At least that's 
what my mother told me. You ask Terrance Sutherland, though, and he'll tell you it 
was a rabbit. That Nanabush was always a rabbit. But I don't believe it. I think a 
crow's better, don't you?” 
I keep my eyes on her a moment longer before looking up at the black bird
again. It's still staring down at us. Tilting its little head back and forth, ruffling its 
feathers as it readjusts on the line when the wind picks up and shakes the wire. The 
crow lets out a few more caws before I look away, although I can still feel its gaze. I 
wonder if I've got something shiny on, but then I remember that's a magpie thing. 
Or is that crows too? 
All I can think about are crows. What are they symbols of? I remember all those 
highly caffeinated 8:30 a.m. English literature lectures. Crows are ominous. They 
spell doom for the person who hears them. They're mysterious and sometimes 
magical. Signifying intelligence, destiny. What's the nursery rhyme again? 
 
One for sorrow, 
two for mirth, 
three for a wedding, 
and four for a birth. 
five for silver, 
six for gold, 
and seven for a secret never to be told. 
 
Sorrow it is. Fitting. 
They remember faces, too. I can hear my dad's voice in my head, echoing like a 
cheesy soap flashback. Crows are smarter than we give them credit for. They're mem- 
ory and truth and creation. 
Funny how you always remember something you're trying to forget. Can't think 
of him now. I just got home. There'll be time for those memories later. I push him 
from my head, but he won't go. 
They're manipulative, though. Don't ever forget who the most famous crow of them 
all was. Shapeshifter. 
Trickster. 
"Hazel?” 
Mom's talking to me again. I turn to look at her, smile. "Did you say some- 
thing?” 
"I said that you came home at a good time. Weather's still nice. Come on,” she 
says. 
The door shuts with a thud, setting off a soft tinkle from the magnetic Repúbli- 
ca Dominicana chime that's stuck up near the top. I kick off my shoes and turn 
into the living room. I step over the large pile of boxes and bags, dropping the one 
with miscellaneous items onto the couch. The warm scent of my mother's famous 
baked beans invites me into the kitchen, where she's standing at the counter, the 
sleeves of her plaid button-down rolled up to her elbows. She's wearing a T-shirt 
that says, "Tax Exempt.” 
"Supper should be ready in maybe fifteen minutes. I'm just waiting on the ban- 
nock to get nice and golden. You want some lemonade?” 
"Geez, is this a powwow feast or something?” 
"Tsk, no. It's just Minute Maid. I love you, kid, but lemons were not on sale this 
week.” 
Mom lifts the lid off the crockpot, scrunching her nose, and quickly replaces 
the cover. I watch her and the simple, easy way she moves about the kitchen. She
barely has to look when she reaches up into the cupboards. Everything in here has 
stayed the same since my older brother was a baby. Sure, the cupboards have been 
repainted and the tile on the floor has been replaced, but it's still the same kitchen. 
It's got the same memories locked inside the yellowing cabinets and the mock- 
granite countertops. 
Being here is comforting and makes me feel safe. It's a relief. Coming home is 
my way to pause while I try to figure out the next part of my life. I don't know if that 
means learning how to move on, but for now I'm happy to be here. City life has a 
way of devouring a person, and a year ago, right after everything went to shit, I 
gladly welcomed the distraction. School was my way of forgetting and ignoring all 
of the hurt that had built up inside of me. But once I had finished, crossed the 
stage, held my degree? It all rushed back into my life. I spent all of July shut up in 
my apartment, shifting between anger and disbelief until I couldn't stand it any- 
more. 
"You glad to be home?” Mom asks, brushing loose strands of hair from her 
eyes as she continues to adjust the flavour of the beans. 
I plunk myself onto one of the stools at the island and lean forward onto my el- 
bows. "Yeah, it's a nice change. I'm excited to sleep tonight without someone 
stomping around in the apartment above me.” 
"Mm-hmm,” she says. "It's a good place to recharge those old batteries, eh?” 
She moves over to the stove and flicks on the oven light, then bends down to peer 
through the tempered glass at the bannock. She clicks her tongue, muttering about 
it taking forever. 
"Yeah,” I answer. "I mean, it's not like I have anything lined up for myself here, 
but I guess that'll be a worry for another day. I should just shut up and enjoy the 
wide-openness of not having to work.” 
She straightens up as she looks at me. "Weird not to be going back to school?” 
I nod. "But like, it's not like I had a whole bunch of friends there or anything. 
Most of the people I hung out with were Gus's friends. I'm not missing anyone. 
Just, I dunno, the freedom and the structure.” 
"Bit contradictory there, kid,” she says with a smile. Mom comes over and pulls 
me into a side hug. "Ah, you'll be fine, just you wait. You'll settle in and before you 
know it you'll be happy that this is your new normal again.” 
"Uh-huh. Hope you're right.” 
She kisses the top of my head and walks back over to the counter to check on 
the crockpot once more. The rich, woody scent of maple syrup and liquid smoke 
fills the room as Mom spoons the beans into two mismatched floral-patterned 
bowls. I watch the way her shoulders shift as she breathes in. She pauses momen- 
tarily, the wooden spoon hovering over the crockpot. She clears her throat. "I'm 
gonna need your help picking out a monument.” 
"What?” I say, caught off guard. "Are you serious?” 
Mom's moved from the counter to stand at the island across from where I'm 
sitting. "Yeah, I don't know if I'll pick the right thing. I mean, your father was always 
so particular about good materials. I think if I go alone, I'll muck it up.” 
"Jesus, Mom, can't you at least let me unpack a little before we start with this?” 
"I'm sorry, Hazel, but you being home to help with his last wishes and all has 
got me thinking about it.” She places her hands on the countertop of the island 
and grips a little. She's doing her best to keep her emotions tucked away, but 
they're creeping up on her. "I can't stand the thought of him lying in that place 
without any sign that says he's there. There's grass there now, you know? It's not 
just some big patch of dirt anymore, but plain old stupid grass. The same kind that 
dogs piss on.” 
I reach out and put my hand overtop hers and she stops talking. "Kaye Mâmâ, 
it's okay. Let's just eat, all right?” 
She nods and I stand up to move to the table. 
Outside, the crow is cawing. 
 
* * * 
 
My bedroom, like much of this house, has remained unchanged since the day I left 
for university. The walls are a golden yellow that glows when the morning light 
pours through the windows, and the duvet is covered in daisies. The window looks 
out onto the front lawn and the pair of skinny evergreens planted there. I can also 
see the highway from here, which made it a great place to watch the school bus 
zoom by on those days back in high school when I hit the snooze button one too 
many times. 
I'm taking a break from hanging up clothes to dig through the biggest of my 
sealed boxes. It's mostly books. Getting it up the five stairs of our split-level house 
proved to be very difficult. Mom even cursed a few times, twice calling the books 
stowed away inside the box wabi-jishkish. A fair judgment, considering most of 
them are the remains of my hard-earned, very White, very male-centric English de- 
gree. 
I settle the books into their new home on the worn bookshelf in the corner. It's 
made of light wood—birch or something—and has been left natural. The only 
stains on it are the five letters of my name written in the untidy scrawl that six-year- 
old me thought was wildly artistic. I used black wax pencil. Mom was so mad when 
she found me etching my mark into the beautifully crafted bookcase. I remember 
her shouting that it had been built by my grandfather back before he was ogima, so 
it was a big deal that I had ruined such an important family heirloom. But she never 
tried to remove it. Maybe it eventually became a sweet memory of a younger me. 
Or maybe she knew trying to wash it away would only smudge it more. 
At this rate, I'll never finish unpacking. I'm terrible at finishing anything. A trait I 
blame wholeheartedly on my father. I would need two extra hands to count how 
many projects around this house have been started and left: three different ver- 
sions of the same bench, two doors that are only half stained, one door frame 
that's got a decorative piece that falls out seemingly at random, the tile in the 
kitchen that doesn't quite reach the edges of the walls, not to mention the deck that 
drops off without stairs or a railing. All those things started. Left to stay unfinished. 
I can feel the tightly bound pieces of myself threaten to tumble and fall apart. A 
year and a half out from his death and I'm still struggling to be normal. Most days, 
I try to keep my grief inside myself. Look fine, feel awful. But being here has me too 
close to it, to everything from before. So instead I swallow to push it away. Down, 
down, down, until it isn't there. 
Moving without thinking, I unpack as much of my stuff as I possibly can. 
Books. Clothes. Movies. Some art to make the walls a little less sunny. I spend the 
majority of my time putting up a corkboard that displays the past four years of my 
life. Years in pictures showing only the highlights. Makes it seem like I was only 
ever happy. 
I pin up a picture of me and my older brother, Gus. It's from my second year of 
university, at a pub that we'd always go to with friends. It was warm and inviting. 
Even had a fireplace and comfortable chairs. Most importantly, the drinks were 
cheap and there was a jukebox. Every night at a certain time—probably closer to 
midnight than to last call—this woman would come in selling flowers, a Polaroid 
camera hanging from her neck. The regulars rarely got suckered into buying any- 
thing from her, but on this night, we made an exception. It was Gus's twenty-eighth 
birthday and we were out celebrating. Gus wasn't a big partier, so we had gone to 
dinner and then for drinks at our favourite place. Someone tried to convince him to 
go bowling, but Gus adamantly refused. Mostly because he didn't want to take the 
bus to get there. 
We did almost everything together during those years I was in Ottawa. People 
used to tell us how lucky we were that we got along as well as we did. We'd get a 
lot of, "Oh, I could never live with my siblings.” For us, it was fine. We've lived to- 
gether pretty much our whole lives, so it was nothing new. You can yell at your 
brother about eating your favourite cereal in a way that you just can't with a regular 
roommate. Plus, we have the same sense of humour and Gus always does the 
dishes. He's kind of a neat freak. 
That night, after too many pints, he wanted his birthday documented in a way 
that couldn't be erased by a thumb tap. He motioned the lady over, stuck his big 
old arm around my shoulders, and pulled me closer. I was laughing so hard be- 
cause he had made some joke—I don't remember it now—and the camera caught 
that perfect moment of the two of us. Real happiness on both our faces. 
Gus doesn't smile so big anymore. 
He's still in Ottawa. He works for the Council of Algonquin Indians now. Does 
work to right wrongs against our People. Toiling. That's what he calls it. He always 
talks about his job that way. It's the type of work that makes you feel like you aren't 
making progress even though you come home with your mind and heart aching. 
He says it's like working in a mine. You get stuff done, but the air down there is 
still killing you slowly. Until recently, he worked as part of the Truth and Reconcil- 
iation Commission. Helping those of us still suffering from second-wave cultural 
genocide to find peace. Which is a fancy way of saying he helped people apply for 
the money that was owed to them by the Canadian government. 
Thinking of my brother makes me happy. He's one of the lucky ones. One of 
the kids who made it off the reserve. He didn't always hang with the best crowds, 
but that never made him lose sight of the freedom of leaving the Rez. Like so many 
of the kids who studied in the country's capital, Gus majored in political science 
and minored in social justice. He keeps talking about going back to get his MBA. I 
don't think he'll go. 
There's a small knock on the door frame and I turn to see Mom. Her hair's 
down now and is falling over her shoulders like a silvery-black waterfall. She's got 
Pocahontas hair. 
"Unpacking going well?” she asks. 
"Mostly.” I shrug. "I didn't realize how much I own. There's stuff here that I 
completely forgot I had.” 
"Need a break yet? There's lots of berries out by the quarry this time of year. 
Would be nice to have some.” Mom walks into the room and sits down on the bed 
facing the wall where I've put up the corkboard. She leans back on her hands and 
smiles. "When's that from?” 
Without even needing to turn around, I know she's pointing at the picture of 
me and Gus. "Gus's birthday. His twenty-eighth.” 
She whistles lowly through her teeth. "Nice that you and Angus got to be in the 
same city after leaving home. I've always been happy that you two got along.” 
"Not always. There was that time that I wanted to hang out with him and his 
friends and they told me to go with them into the bush behind the house and they 
just left me there.” 
"He was young. Brothers do that.” 
"I was young too! Like, six maybe?” 
"Oh, you were fine. It's always good to get lost in the woods at least once when 
you're little. Brings out the Indian in the kid.” 
"Don't think it worked for me because I've still got the worst sense of direction. 
I feel like the least-Indian Indian ever. Oh my god, I say that and you are literally 
braiding your hair right now.” 
She tosses the finished braid over her shoulder. "Hey, when you go out to the 
quarry, take a look at that old road, will you?” 
"Why? You wanna open it up again?” 
Mom shakes her head. "No, but your dad was interested in its possibilities, so 
maybe you should be too?” 
I press my lips together into a hard line. "Dad liked to start and not finish 
things all the time. Maybe the quarry should stay that way?” 
She shrugs off the question and turns her attention away from me. I watch her 
for a while longer, trying to find answers to her suggestion in her features. What 
possibilities can come from an overgrown hole in the ground? 
Mom brings her gaze back to me after staring at the rest of the pictures on the 
corkboard. I can tell she's looking at the ones of me and my father because she's 
got water in her eyes. They're great pictures—one of us at Disney World, another 
one of the two of us in matching motorcycle jackets. 
I had no idea she'd be in this bad shape. Granted, she's not falling apart into a 
weepy mess at every mention of Dad, but the fact that there are tears at all is 
enough. Mom has always been the strong one. Always happy. And now, well, she's 
not. She wears this grin on her face, but the smile never reaches her eyes. I know 
because I can't see the lines at the corners of them. When she really smiles, the 
wrinkles make her look like she's grinning bigger than she is. She's had them for- 
ever, the crow's feet. Most people think that wrinkles are bad, that they show your 
age, but not Mom. She has worn those crow's feet with pride since the day she no- 
ticed them. 
"They're gifts from Nanabush,” she'd say. "I remember my mom—your 
gôkom—used to say that the Great Shapeshifter liked to visit us in our dreams. He 
shows up so much that eventually we get these little lines on our eyes from where 
he's walked. And the dust in the corners of them, by your nose? That's bits of the 
Spirit World. Stuff that he brings over with him when he visits.” 
She tears her eyes away from the pictures and finally notices me staring at her. 
She blinks once or twice and tilts her head. "Jesus, you look like your dad when you 
do that.” 
I try to say something, but nothing comes out. I end up looking away. 
Mom continues, "He had this way of looking at someone, didn't matter who, 
and he could see them. Not like just seeing a person like looking at their clothes or 
what dumb haircut they have—trust me, he did that too—but he could see a per- 
son. When that man looked at you with those big old grey eyes, he saw through 
you.” 
"But my eyes are brown.” What a stupid thing to say. 
She smiles but winces too. "Yeah, you got my eyes. Sorry about that one, kid.” 
She moves to stand, brushing her hands on the front of her jeans as she stretches. 
She comes over to me, places her hands on my shoulders and looks at me. "Nah. 
My colour. But those are still his eyes.” 
The knot in my throat quickly moves into my eyes and makes them water, so 
Mom puts her arms around me. I don't want to cry, so I make strangled noises 
until I've got myself under control and she lets me go. She pats my cheek before 
turning to leave the room. For a long while I stare at the spot where she had been 
standing. When I convince myself to move again, I reach up to wipe away tears that 
aren't there. 
I got sick of crying months ago. 
Sick and tired. 
That's what he was too. 
Now I'm just tired. 
 
* * * 
 
Mom's earlier suggestion to pick berries turned out to be the distraction I needed. 
Classic Mom. Therapy that also includes benefits for her. Being home is tougher 
than I thought it would be. I can see traces of my father everywhere. I expect him to 
walk in the door any moment. I keep thinking I'll see his truck pull into the drive- 
way. I'll hear him whistling to himself as he walks up the steps to our house. It's 
starting to eat away at me, building up until I feel the anxiety threatening to make 
me panic or lose my breath. 
Outside, the fear almost disappears. The trees that surround me are thrumming 
with the summer buzz of cicadas. Everything is so close in this forest, it's as if I'm 
inside a living, breathing creature. The air snuggles in like an embrace. Mom used 
to say that there was magic in this place. Every tree, every leaf, every little flower 
bud, and every birdsong carries a story and piece of our people. She used to read 
the bark of the birches back here and tell me my future. Nothing she said ever 
came true. 
I follow a well-worn trail through the forest behind our house. I've walked this 
path so many times I could probably do it in my sleep. I move between the trees 
slowly but easily. This trek has always calmed me. The best berries grow past the 
first throng of trees. If I keep walking through the growth of wooden giants, I'll 
come out into a huge clearing. I can't tell if it's perfectly round, but from the mid- 
dle of it, it feels eerily so. It looks like it was clear-cut, that some human had a hand 
in creating this place, but that's not the case. People have tried finding evidence of 
a lumber company in this location and found nothing. As far as we Natives can be 
sure, the clearing has been here as long as we have, perhaps longer. I can only as- 
sume there are stories and myths linked to it, long forgotten. Dad used to say it 
was faeries, which he heard from his Irish great-grandmother. Mom insisted that 
faeries only make circles of mushrooms, not clearings in forests. Plus, she hated 
the idea of someone else's stories from across the ocean finding roots here. 
Whatever the reason for it, this clearing in the middle of the bush is beautiful. 
It's probably sacred, but now I'm the only one who sees it. Mom doesn't come 
back here. Something about the air feeling funny. I don't mind. If it does feel 
strange, it's only for a moment. All it takes is one light breeze to brush along the 
grass and the glade will settle. 
I take a moment to glance up at the sky. When we were kids, I used to think I 
could see the curve of the world up there. I'd stare at the way the sky seemed to 
blend into a blue arc and I'd feel like I was at the centre of something—that there 
was a reason I was here. I still experience a small flutter of excitement, but now I 
know that's left over from my youth, my self-involved sense of importance. And 
yet, here I am smiling. I take one deep breath in, the smell of cedar filling my lungs, 
and slowly let it out, feeling the wind pick up and breathe with me. 
A bird croaks from somewhere in the trees, the sound echoing and carrying 
along the air for a moment before disappearing among the other calls and whistles. 
My footsteps are light as I move through the grass toward the edge of the glade, 
the earth a carpet beneath me. The second I make it past the pines, the air closes in 
tightly. Whatever haze of bliss had been over me before is gone and I feel a weight 
in my chest. My shoulders slump back down and I accept the familiar discomfort 
as I weave in and out of the trees. The first patch of raspberries is nearby. They 
grow all along the northern edge of the forest and continue to follow the sloping 
dirt road that leads down to the quarry. 
I smell the rock and water of the old open-pit mine before I see it. This place is 
familiar in a way that goes beyond my own memory. The land has been in my dad's 
family for generations, even before someone came along and started digging into 
it. I read something once that said Indigenous People are tied to the land through 
memory that exists in the absence of sensory experience. It's in our blood. I'm not 
sure if that's true for everyone, but I know that this place is a part of me and has 
been for years beyond my own counting. 
I'm standing on the cusp of the far side of the quarry. I tend to keep a good dis- 
tance from the edge because just beyond it is a drop of about a hundred feet to the 
water. When I was little, my best friend, Mia, and I would come out here and dare 
each other to get close enough to hang our legs over. She always got closer than I 
did, what with my fear of heights, but neither of us ever made it to the edge. Plus, 
the fact that we were told to stay totally clear of the place was enough thrill for a 
goody two-shoes like me. It scared me back then and it still scares me. It's been 
over a hundred years since the pit was operational, and even then, it wasn't a very 
successful mine. For years, rumours and stories flew around the community like 
little birds fluttering from ear to ear. They said that the mine had to close because 
people kept dying or there were accidents that couldn't be explained. Elders like 
Old Tommy Knight said his ancestors cursed the place. The White Man took and 
took and took without ever giving thanks. No tobacco was offered, so Mother Earth 
decided to call in her debts and snatch back what she was owed. I've always 
thought that story was too dark. Mother Earth as a vengeful spirit doesn't seem 
right. Those were just stories made up by parents to keep their kids away. The quar- 
ry closed so long ago, the reasons faded with it. The land around it is fertile, but 
nothing's ever been done with it. The property has been in my dad's name forever, 
so if anyone was to do something about it, it would have been him. 
I'm glad it's a dead investment. I get this place all to myself. The old road that 
leads here is overgrown—too difficult for even the most seasoned bush explorers. 
The rocky terrain around the quarry makes it dangerous, even without the drop into 
the terrifyingly clear water below. The years haven't been kind to the weathered and 
winding road that was used to haul the caches of silver. Now, one wrong step 
could mean an ugly fall. 
I step out of the woods and amble toward the growth of raspberry bushes that 
has made its home between the forest and the quarry's edge. The wind picks up, 
creating rippling patterns along the water. It's colder than it should be at this time 
of year. I tuck my arm in close to my body, clutching the empty margarine con- 
tainer tightly, as I gather the deep-red berries, each one making a soft plunking 
noise as it hits the plastic. It's quite some time before I pick enough to even cover 
the bottom of the container. After a while, I settle into a rhythm, relaxing enough to 
sing quietly. It's an old hand drum song that my mom used to sing to me. Even 
alone, I'm self-conscious about what I sound like, so I sing slowly and softly, and 
only use my full voice at the end of the song. As soon as the last word slips past 
my lips, a trio of black-winged birds explodes from the tree closest to me. I jump 
and almost drop my berries. Their calls echo across the expanse of the quarry in 
perfect time. I watch the birds until they're specks on the horizon. 
I make it back to the house as the sun slips beyond the edge of the western sky. 
Mom's out on the back porch, sitting at the table. Her chair is pushed out from it 
and her feet are resting on another one beside her. She's got the phone pinched 
between her ear and shoulder as she picks at her nails. I catch bits of her conver- 
sation as I get closer to the house. She hasn't spotted me yet. 
"I don't know what Abe was thinking.” She pauses and listens while the other 
person on the line talks. "Mm-hmm, yeah. Had plans for it, that's for sure. Guess 
it's something the kids are gonna have to talk about since he left it to them.” 
What is this about? Dad left us a bunch of land, that I know, but this is some- 
thing specific. 
"Well, if it wasn't for that damn deal, maybe we'd have more wiggle room.” She 
glances at me as I walk up the steps to the deck. "I'll talk to you later. Hazel just 
got back. Okay, I will. Bye.” Mom ends the call and places the phone down on the 
table. "Good berry adventure?” 
I nod and move to sit at the head of the table, placing the container down in 
front of me. "Who was that?” 
"Your auntie. She says hello, by the way.” 
"What were you talking about?” 
She gives me a noncommittal shrug. "Your dad's will.” 
"Oh,” I say, looking away. "You want my help or something?” 
She shakes her head. "No, no. I've got it under control for now.” 
"'Kay, if you're sure.” 
When I look back at Mom, she's staring at me curiously. My stomach pitches 
and I can feel my eyes go wide. 
"What? You're looking at me so weird right now and it's kinda freaking me out.” 
"Oh,” she says, blinking for a moment. "Sorry, kid. It's just . . .” She plucks 
something from my shoulder. Mom twirls the gleaming black feather between her 
thumb and forefinger. 
I can only blink at her. 
Her smile comes back, bigger this time. "A gift from Nanabush. Guess he's got 
your back, huh?” 
I exhale and my breath fogs into the night air. There are stars hanging in the
expanse above me, blinking down at my collapsed body. My hands seem to sink 
into the ground, making it difficult to push myself up. I blink once, twice. My eyes 
are open, but I can't see beyond the tall, naked trees silhouetted by starlight. Fear 
starts deep in my gut, threatening to take over. I swallow it and send it away. Some- 
thing whispers to me in the dark. 
—Hazel. 
Calm spreads through me and I rise, slowly and carefully. I listen, trying to hear 
the voice who seems to know me. Curiosity presses me to move forward in the 
dark. My footsteps dissolve in the space around me, the ground eating them up be- 
fore they can make a sound. Erasing me like I'm not here. 
But where is here? 
—It is where you need to be. 
"Who's there?” I wait, my own voice echoing into the cold air, the hair on my 
arms pulling toward the sky, but there is no answer. I walk forward. This time, I can 
hear my steps. Or maybe that's the double-beat drumming of my heart? 
—Keep moving. 
I swallow, but my mouth has gone dry and it does little to ease my discomfort. I 
keep walking, even without a destination. The fear starts to creep back into my 
body, making me tremble. I feel the air get colder and soon the ground is covered 
in a crisp blanket of snow. I hear it crunch beneath my feet. I want to pull the 
shroud of darkness off me, so I bring my hands to my face. And that's when I real- 
ize I'm crying. Or I have been crying. Am I still? 
Something flutters past me and I stop. My pulse pounds in my ears, so fast I 
can't count the beats. I'm getting dizzy. Like when they fan the drum at a powwow 
and another pickup starts and then another and another, so you just keep dancing 
and dancing, making your way around the arbour with no idea of when they might 
finally stop so you can rest your feet. 
—How do you expect to move on when you keep stopping like that? 
"Was that you?” 
—Was what me? 
"The wings. Just now.” 
—Yes. 
There's a flutter of movement that I can almost see. Wings brush the side of my 
face, smooth and cool and impatient. Faster than before. I close my eyes, a small 
act to help me listen. 
"What are you?” 
—Does it matter? I'm here. That should be enough. 
"It isn't,” I say. "You're nothing but empty words right now. Show yourself.” 
Two grey eyes flicker like beacons in the darkness, and I know they're staring at 
me. Looking me up and down, studying everything from the way I stand to the 
curve of my eyelashes. They stare and stare, and because they are the only light I 
can see, I stare right back. As my eyes start to adjust, I pick up the smooth outline 
of a black bird. I blink and it comes into focus. It's too big to be a raven, so that 
means it's far too big to be a crow. I've never seen a bird like this one before. But 
by the way it looks at me, I can tell it's seen me. It knows me. 
I shudder. I feel vulnerable under this bird's gaze. It tilts its head this way and 
that as it surveys me, blinking a few times before ruffling its feathers and opening 
its beak to caw at me. It's so normal that it upsets me. I expected the voice I heard. 
How disappointing. 
—Can you see now? 
The bird's beak is shut, but it looks at me, expecting an answer. 
This whole thing is starting to lose its mysticism, and my frustration is growing 
again. I want answers, not more questions and riddles. It's making me grind my 
teeth. "No. You're just lines in the dark.” 
—As are you. Yet, here we both are, looking for a way out. 
"And you can give that to me?” 
—We could trade. Help me and I'll help you. Fair, don't you think? 
The look on this bird's face is familiar. Like a predator cornering its prey. His 
eyes glimmer warmly, but I do not trust him. He speaks as if I have already agreed 
to whatever bargain he offers. As I look him over, it dawns on me. 
"Wait. I know you, I do. I thought I didn't, but it's making sense now. You're 
Nanabush.” 
—"The Great Shapeshifter” sounds nicer, better, and more formal, since we're 
strangers. 
"That isn't true,” I say. "You and I have met before. You know me.” 
—I do, yes. 
"And since you're on a first-name basis with me, it's only fair that I use yours.” 
I move my gaze from him and take in my surroundings as light from an aurora 
reaches me. Birch trees—I can smell the bark—are silhouetted in the dark. 
Nanabush is perched on the low hanging branches, looking down at me. 
—Fine, so be it. 
"This whole thing, it's lucid dreaming, isn't it? Where you're aware that you're 
dreaming? Let me change it. Where's all the magic?” 
—You people claim you want to dream about magic when everything around you 
has been created out of the Great Magic of the Earth and the Sky. The air that all living 
things breathe gives the gift of life, but it can also take life away. Is that not magical? 
"I wouldn't say death is magical. Might be for the person who wants it, but the 
rest of us left behind are stuck with pain and grief and anger that we can't unpack.” 
His laughter startles me. 
—People take dying for granted. 
"What's that supposed to mean? It's awful. I've seen it. Your body fails and 
shuts down until you're trapped inside of it.” My voice shrinks and breaks. "Just a 
husk of someone who used to mean so much.” 
—You mean your father? 
His words cut clean and clear through me. Nanabush looks at me again and 
my ears start to ring. It's quiet at first, but I can feel it pushing into the space be- 
hind my eyes. I try to press the pain from my head, but I can't. 
"You don't know anything about that,” I say. 
He's still gazing at me and I hate it. Makes me feel naked. I lash out. 
"Aren't you supposed to be a sage? Give me a vision quest or leave me alone.” I 
wince as the ringing gets louder. 
—You're not ready for that. 
"That's rich. I mean, if I'm dreaming, then technically you're just a figment of 
my imagination.” I cut myself off with a laugh. "I don't think I'm ready.” 
Silence settles between us uncomfortably until all I can hear and feel is the ring- 
ing. But the quiet, it fits us like a pair of too-big shoes, making me stumble back 
into conversation. 
"I want to wake up now.” 
Nanabush laughs, a ragged croaking that echoes around us. 
—Then open your eyes. 
"They're already open. You're all I can see.” 
—Do you see me? I don't think that you do. Look harder. He spreads his feathers 
wide, his whole form growing until he's bigger than me. He looks down at me, his 
head twisting and twitching. 
"I see you!” I snap, screaming at him. "Lines in the dark. All around me.” 
—And that's what it's like. Being here? Like trying to draw lines in the dark. His 
beak opens in laughter again. Nanabush flaps his wings, sending a rush of air that 
whips and pushes me to the ground. 
"Stop it! Stop it! I want to wake up!” 
I grip my hands to my head to stop the ringing. Why won't it stop? The world 
around me is swallowed up by Nanabush's growing shadow, punctuated by the 
clacking of his beak. 
I cry out into the darkness. And I'm back in my bedroom. When my eyes finally 
open, the pain's gone, but the ringing persists. Slowly, the street lamp's glow 
comes to life on the walls of my bedroom. I run my hand over my eyes and back 
into my hair. There's sweat on my forehead. I tell myself to calm down, it wasn't 
real. Inhale deeply until I can breathe normally again. The clock beside my bed 
reads 3:04. The ringing isn't just in my ears. Now that I'm awake, I can hear it prop- 
erly. It's the kettle. 
Mom's awake too. Some irrational, still-dreaming part of me wonders if she 
had the same dream that I did. She's making tea. She does this whenever she can't 
sleep. She swears by the tea leaves, saying they help you fall asleep and stay asleep. 
For a moment I consider staying in bed, pulling the covers up so they're nearly 
over my head, leaving space for me to breathe, as I make deals with my brain to let 
me fall back into a dreamless sleep. But that's pointless because the more I tell my- 
self to shut my eyes, the more I don't want to. I'm afraid that there'll be black wings 
and grey eyes waiting for me on the other side. 
Pushing off the covers, I swing my legs around and stand up. I stumble but 
catch myself against the bedside table. My body starts to ache like I've just finished 
a half-marathon. I stretch to push the pain from my muscles before I tiptoe out 
into the hallway. 
Downstairs, I hear Mom humming to herself. She stops when I appear in the 
door frame, but only for a moment. She reaches into the cupboard and pulls down 
an elaborately decorated box. She's chosen a blend from a bookstore in the next 
town over: Labrador tea. People around here say it can cure almost anything. I've 
even heard that it can help a woman induce labour, when her baby is being stub- 
born and refuses to leave her. That's what helped Mia when her little girl kept 
pushing back her due date. Or maybe it was a coincidence. Can't be sure now 
anyhow, seeing as the kid's been here for five years. 
Wordlessly, Mom grabs a second mug from the cupboard before she brews tea 
for us both. She gives me a smile and takes both mugs in her hands. I watch as 
she walks over to the island and sits down, then move to join her. We sit in silence 
for the better part of ten minutes while we wait for our tea to cool. Steam rises from 
the mugs. Mine has a picture of Mickey Mouse on it. Mom's reads, "Bowler of the 
Month.” The seconds tick by. Mom grabs her mug with both hands, brings it to 
her lips, and attempts to take a sip. It's still too hot. She scrunches her nose and 
shakes her head before putting the mug back down on the island. 
She doesn't ask me why I'm up. I give her the same kindness. 
Neither of us drinks the tea. 
In the morning, I take my time going down the stairs, running my fingers along the
edge of the wall like I've done since I was a kid. The movement is old, part of who I 
am by now, but I still pay attention to the way the paint dimples. There's a beaded 
breastplate that belonged to my dad hanging on the wall. It has these long pieces 
of thin leather with the smallest jingles I've ever seen hanging from them. When 
my fingers touch them, they chime together daintily.